That might have been the biggest rumor about any
concrete step taken by the U.S. I think the great
disappointment of all the thinking Hungarians
was the crisis of the Suez Canal right following on
the Hungarian Revolution. it became obvious to us
that in the confusion that the Soviet experienced
in this totally unexpected revolution in
Hungary, the British and the French took
advantage and started the invasion of the Suez
Canal. That was the greatest betrayal of the
freedom fight. because it is manifested to the
Hungarians that the West has other priorities
than Eastern Europe. And it has also shown that in
the Middle East, even armed intervention for the
oil interests of the West is imaginable, but for
Eastern Europe, no such risk will be ever taken. I
think I learned about the West quite a bit from that
step. I have not been bitter, nor am I really
ultimately bitter today, I think I just developed
a healthy amount of cynicism, which I still
preserved. And every thinking person should be
realistic about the way oil rules the world. Okay.
I'd like to talk a little bit about how you came to
come to the United States. Well, my coming to the
United States does not parallel the way most of the
refugees of 1956 came to this country. The
revolution
was followed by an exodus of 200,000 Hungarians,
most of them young, and most of them educated to the
West. and the way I considered the West that I have
seen, because I myself fled the country on the 21st
of November, so less than a month after the
revolution, I felt that the West was tremendously
helpful, just to say I'm a Hungarian meant in the
first few weeks after my departure from Hungary, a
free ticket to any country, and that the US
included. I think the first 50,000
people leaving Hungary virtually had a free
choice of choosing any country of immigration.
Such places as Switzerland, which has never had an
open immigration policy, opened its borders for
10,000 Hungarian immigrants. And of course, the
U.S. had dramatically increased its contingent,
its quota for Hungarian refugees, so that had I
said right upon my arrival to Vienna that I want to
go to the U.S., within a week I could have arrived
here. But at that time, I wanted to go to Rome and
study, plus I had a brother, refugee of earlier
years living in Vienna and actually running a very
good business so I did not even consider coming to
the US at that time it was only after finishing my
studies in Rome that my order has decided that I
should join our foundation in Texas by the way our
foundation just came about at the time of the
Hungarian Revolution the monastery in Dallas has
just started a few months before the revolution
broke out. In 1955 we came to, our first group came
to this place, and it was in 56 that the first wing of
the Abbey was opened.
But I came here of course only in 1962, at the time I
was already a westernized
after I had lived for six years in Western Europe
and got very much acquainted with the other half of
the world, which up to that time was completely
sealed and unknown to me. I arrived to the West as
coming to a completely different world. Okay. In
retrospect, what do you see as the
accomplishments of the revolution well the the
revolution did not accomplish anything that it
was it has set out to accomplish at the same time it
has accomplished a lot of things that it did not
really intend to immediate success was and that is
unfortunately again in was in favor of of other
people than than the ones who fought and died, the
immediate success appeared first of all in
Western Europe. The French Communist Party and
the Italian Communist Party literally fell apart
in the aftermath of the Hungarian Revolution. The
strength of the communist movement in Western
Europe was based first of all and most of all on the
tremendous brilliance of the French Communist
Party. The French Communist Party, as people
might still recall, included the best minds of the
country. Jean-Paul Sartre himself was a
communist, and Jean-Paul Sartre left the
Communist Party a few weeks after the Hungarian
Revolution. So, the Communist Party has lost
membership and votes in the decade following the
Hungarian Revolution. As a consequence, what was
a danger in the West, namely communist takeover
either in Italy or France
ceased to exist. And so that was a, I think, a great
service for freedom in Western Europe. And you
might say that on the long run the communist
movement in Western Europe has never recovered
from that loss. It peaked before the Hungarian
Revolution and has never reached that same peak.
Maybe in Italy it did, but by the time in Italy it
came back again, with a large number of votes, the
communist movement has disassociated itself
from Russia. So, in a sense, that was a deadly loss
and defeat for the Western European communist
movement. I think the Hungarians should be proud
of having achieved that, without having tried it.
Another thing which Hungary now enjoys to a great
extent is the
relaxation of the communist system in Hungary.
That did not take place immediately, but the gulag
communism, as we call it now, has been in a way the
product of the atmosphere which came about after
the revolution.
The Hungarian leaders, the puppet government of
Janos Kadar, that has been put into place after the
revolution, got a considerable amount of
freedoms in economic planning, and later on even
in the political course it has chosen to follow.
Consequently, today Hungary enjoys more
economic welfare and also more
liberal policies and human rights than the other
communist countries do. The fact that all the
refugees, practically all the refugees of the
1956 revolution, received amnesty and are free to
go back to Hungary and visit. And the Hungarian
press refers to the revolution of 1956 less and
less as to a counter-revolution, but more and more
as to the terrible events of October 1956, shows
that they really don't want to hold up this as a
threat or a record against any one of those
participants who fled to the West. So the climate
has changed in the 60s, about a decade after the
revolution, the system has relaxed and
accomplished quite a turnaround. Whether or not
this is really very good for the country,
Solzhenitsyn probably would disagree because I
think while welfare was established the soul was
lost. Today my contemporaries in Hungary
wouldn't want to see another revolution if they
can help it. They have learned their lesson
because there was an awful lot of suffering coming
out of the revolution itself and they cherish the
little advantage they have managed to obtain at
the price of the bloodshed in 1956. So, a new
Hungary came about which is more cynical, less
idealistic and totally resigned to the Soviet
dominion. So, in a way, the Soviets have
established themselves forever in the aftermath
But we gained little freedoms that we cherish, and
we will think it over twice before we say anything
dirty against the Soviets in big publicity, while
we are allowed not to say anything about the Soviet
in our private circles. Okay. Now that you've
lived in the United States for about 20 years, how
do you see certain things such as the Cold War, the
Red Scare feeling in the United States during
that? Well, I think I have a double feeling.
Basically,
I am concerned about both the dumb, shortsighted,
uninformed rhetoric of the ultraconservative
right wing, which tries to artificially keep up
the Red Scare without having intelligent
propaganda to offer, because basically the
rhetoric goes without any solid information. On
the other hand, the liberal
movements that try to downplay the Red Scare are
just as short-sighted and uninformed. so I feel
that the basic facts of life are that this country
remains isolated in in terms of information and
perspective from the rest of the world and as a
consequence we do not have a public opinion that is
realistic about our place and role in worldwide
dimensions one of the typical things that I might
quote is the fact that even our diplomats in the
Soviet Union do not speak Russian, and our general
public keeps on being geographically and
historically ignorant about the past, about
dangers of the present, and about the nature of the
Soviet, of the communist movement. So you either
have one kind of propaganda or another, but there
is no core of well-informed, thoughtful,
intelligent people who would responsibly build a
public opinion that is realistic and bases the
decisions on facts rather than feelings and
immediate selfish interests. A lot of
politicians use the writing rhetoric in order to
win votes, rather than any other purpose. So I'm a
little bit discouraged, but I must say I got used to
it. I do not expect people to know the facts of
history, or even the facts of geography. So what
the Soviet empire really is, what problems it has,
and how it really relates to its own internal
problems. We have a lot of tasks to educate the
public, but I don't see the people really involved
in doing it. Very quickly, could you describe what
you think the Soviet Union is? Well, I think the
Soviet Union carries an awful lot of internal
problems with it, but we should not rejoice and say
that it will destroy itself on that account. I
think, on the one hand, we must see that the Soviet
is a system loaded with problems. On the other
hand, the problems that the Soviets have make them
even more aggressive rather than less ready to
strike out and risk confrontation and even war
with us. And this we do not easily understand
because we think that if we have economic
problems, for example, then we are less
interested in spending on defense and we are more
interested in spending on our own problems and
solve our own problems. All those, the logic of the
Soviet is exactly the reverse of what, of the logic
by which this country lives. And I think most of our
mistakes come from the fact that we don't realize
that the system has a different internal logic. I
think that the Soviets are a constant threat to the
rest of the world, and also to this country.
However, that doesn't mean that their system is
superior. Their system is running into more and
more problems. As a consequence, they are even
more tempted to take the risks of large
confrontations in order to get out of their
problems by, you might say, robbing other
countries. Okay. Also, there was a, it's a
situation that ran vaguely similar, the
situation in Vietnam, which there was a war, I
suppose, against communism. but specifically,
how do you feel about the large influx of refugees
coming to the United States after you've seen the
large influx of Hungarians coming to the United
States? Well, I think one has to be open and helpful
to the people who are in need, and that I say on a
general scale as a conviction. I think especially
the Vietnamese refugees, had the right even to be
helped by America more than the Hungarian
refugees had the right to be helped. There is some
parallelism, though, because I think in both
cases, the tragedy that has taken place involved
the United States one way or another. In Vietnam, I
think the United States was much more involved
than in Hungary.
Of course, do not think that as a consequence, you
know, anybody at any time wanting to come to this
country should be given a free ticket. But, of
course, the country is still wrestling with its
own identity and in defining its own policies of
immigration. This is a country of people who
themselves are the descendants of immigrants,
and therefore it would be very difficult to close
the borders to further immigrants if we are
ourselves immigrants or the grandchildren or
great-grandchildren of immigrants. So it's,
yeah, there is a moral question here, also a
long-range policy setting and an assessment of
the resources of the country. And I really don't
know where the limits should be placed. Okay.
Father Denis, how do you feel that the United
States should react now and in the near future? to
or should handle its self-diplomacy with the
Soviet satellites, Hungary and those countries
in the Soviet Union itself?
I may not really. I probably have stopped thinking
about how this country should operate. In the last
20 years, I became cynical enough to wonder only
how it is going to operate. I think it will operate
according to its perceived interests, rather
than any lofty principles of any sort. I don't see
anything wrong with you following your own
principles, I just wish that those principles
would be a little more far-sighted. At the present
time, the United States is still involved in a
scheme that came about in the Kennedy years namely
cooperation coexistence and hope for loosening
of the Soviet system by economic and cultural
cultural exchange I don't think that this will
change unless the Soviets unless the Soviet
changes its mind in other words we will give
foreign aid, loan, help of any sort, to the extent
we can do business with them. There are, I simply
see, no possibility for this country to change its
course. I mean, the most blatant case was the
grains sale. We are selling grain to the Soviet
Union, not because we are merciful to the hungry
people there, but because otherwise our farmers
will be upset. As a consequence, we will do
business with that part of the country as long as we
can do profitably business with them. I think that
this is not necessarily a bad policy, but, well,
this also means that there is no way for us to keep
the to change the situation of the world over there
in any significant way. I may not admire this
country for what has taken place in the last 20
years, and yet, at the same time, I say, well, maybe
we have eased the brutality of of the Soviet system
to some extent in some countries, like Hungary
itself, which received a lot of financial and
other aid from the United States through an
increase of foreign exchange. I don't know.
I don't see any solution for these great problems
of the world. I think we are living in the, living
out the consequences of what has taken place after
the Second World War. And I don't think anybody
knows how to solve the problems, realistically. I
am of the conviction that the present system of
of defeat and problems is better than a nuclear
war. As a consequence, I certainly would not say
that we should inch
our way to a nuclear confrontation.
I would like to see this country being more willing
to make sacrifices for the freedom it possesses.
and be less blatantly selfish and hedonistic in
just trying to do everything in order to improve
its living standard I feel that we have gotten into
a mentality that might cost our most precious
freedom one of these days but how can this logic be
changed we are sort of slipping into a mentality in
which even the most conservative, Republican,
right-wing elements in this country would make a
decision in favor of the economy as the first
priority, regardless of any worldwide
consequences for the future of freedom. That
seems to be the most discouraging. uh, aspect of,
of our present mentality that we have
established. And I don't think that, uh, even,
even Reagan has a different mind. Okay. Thank you,
Father Dennis. I appreciate it. I enjoyed this.